[Config] Declarative config (phase 1) initial design and scalar values (#7413)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet: src/OpenTelemetry.Configuration.Declarative/README.md

# OpenTelemetry.Configuration.Declarative

> [!WARNING]
> This is an experimental package. APIs may change or be removed in
> future releases.

A partial experimental implementation of the [OpenTelemetry
declarative-configuration
specification](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/sdk-configuration/declarative-configuration/)
for the OpenTelemetry .NET SDK.

Declarative configuration allows you to configure the OpenTelemetry SDK using a
YAML file instead of (or in addition to) environment variables and code-based
setup. This package implements a subset of the stable OTel spec v1.0
(`file_format: "1.0"`).

## Getting started

### 1. Set the config file path

```bash
OTEL_CONFIG_FILE=/path/to/otel-config.yaml
```

### 2. Wire it into your OTel setup

**Recommended on `HostApplicationBuilder` / `WebApplicationBuilder`:**

```csharp
builder.Configuration.AddOpenTelemetryDeclarativeConfiguration(); // reads OTEL_CONFIG_FILE
builder.Services.AddOpenTelemetry()
    .WithTracing(b => b.AddSource("MyApp.*").AddConsoleExporter());
```

> **On classic `HostBuilder`**, add the source inside `ConfigureAppConfiguration`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**With `HostBuilder`**, add the source inside `ConfigureAppConfiguration`:
```

```csharp
hostBuilder.ConfigureAppConfiguration(b =>
    b.AddOpenTelemetryDeclarativeConfiguration("otel-config.yaml"));
hostBuilder.ConfigureServices(services =>
    services.AddOpenTelemetry().WithTracing(...));
```

**Alternative:** wire through `IOpenTelemetryBuilder` (reads `OTEL_CONFIG_FILE`
when called without a path):

```csharp
services.AddOpenTelemetry()
    .UseDeclarativeConfiguration()
    .WithTracing(b => b.AddSource("MyApp.*").AddConsoleExporter());
```

Or, to load from an explicit path (ignoring `OTEL_CONFIG_FILE`):

```csharp
services.AddOpenTelemetry()
    .UseDeclarativeConfiguration("otel-config.yaml")
    .WithTracing(...);
```

`UseDeclarativeConfiguration()` works best on modern hosts
(`WebApplicationBuilder`, `HostApplicationBuilder`) where `IConfiguration` is

> already registered before `AddOpenTelemetry()` is called. On classic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
already registered before `AddOpenTelemetry()` is called. With
```

Author: Fixed in 2eaa8f62d1702587952b790d4fc0a29c7ce97d57.

`HostBuilder`, use the `ConfigureAppConfiguration` approach instead so the YAML
source is added before DI configuration is built. Calling
`UseDeclarativeConfiguration()` twice on the same `IServiceCollection` is a
no-op - the first file path wins and a warning is emitted via EventSource.
Calling it with a different path does not replace the first registration.

### 3. Write a YAML config file

```yaml
file_format: "1.0"

resource:
  attributes:
    - name: service.name
      value: ${SERVICE_NAME:-my-service}
    - name: service.version
      value: "1.0.0"
```

## Supported settings

| YAML field | SDK effect |
| --- | --- |
| `disabled: true` | `OTEL_SDK_DISABLED` - builds a no-op provider |
| `resource.attributes` | `OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES` - resource attributes on all signals |
| `resource.attributes_list` | `OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES` - resource attributes in pre-formatted `key=value` list form |

`resource.attributes_list` is treated as a pre-percent-encoded

> `OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES` string and passed through without modification. In

Reviewer: "pre-percent-encoded" reads a bit weird to me.

```suggestion
`resource.attributes_list` is treated as containing a
`OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES` string that has not been percent-encoded
and is passed through without modification. In
```

Author: Fixed in 2eaa8f62d1702587952b790d4fc0a29c7ce97d57.

| `${MY_VAR:-default}` | Value of `MY_VAR`, or `default` if undefined/empty |
| `$$` | Literal `$` (escape) - so `$${MY_VAR}` yields literal `${MY_VAR}` |

Undefined variables without a default resolve to an empty string.

## Precedence

When you call `UseDeclarativeConfiguration()` or
`AddOpenTelemetryDeclarativeConfiguration()`, the YAML source is **appended
after** all sources already registered on the builder at that point. That means
declarative configuration **takes precedence over** environment variables,
`appsettings.json`, and other sources that were registered earlier.

Sources you add **after** that call take precedence over YAML values (same as
standard `IConfiguration` ordering).

> [!NOTE]
> `OTEL_SDK_DISABLED` and `OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES` are read directly
> from `IConfiguration`, not via `IOptions<T>`, so `Configure<T>()` /
> `PostConfigure<T>()` cannot override them. Use a higher-priority
> `IConfiguration` source (e.g. `AddInMemoryCollection`) instead.

## Known limitations

- File watching is not supported; the YAML file is read once at start-up.
- `resource.attributes` values are percent-encoded per the OTel spec. Duplicate

>   attribute names: first occurrence wins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `resource.attributes` values are percent-encoded per the OTel specification.
  For duplicate attribute names the first occurrence wins.
```

Author: Fixed in 2eaa8f62d1702587952b790d4fc0a29c7ce97d57.

- Unknown YAML sections are logged and ignored rather than causing an error.
- Plain (unquoted) YAML scalars that resolve to `null`, `Null`, `NULL`, or `~`
  after environment variable substitution are treated as YAML null and the
  setting is silently ignored. To preserve the string `"null"` as a value, use a
  quoted scalar: `value: "null"`. This is consistent with YAML 1.2 Core Schema

>   semantics applied post-substitution as required by the OTel spec.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  semantics applied post-substitution as required by the OTel specification.
```

Author: Fixed in 2eaa8f62d1702587952b790d4fc0a29c7ce97d57.

hostBuilder.ConfigureServices(services =>
    services.AddOpenTelemetry().WithTracing(...));
```

**Alternative:** wire through `IOpenTelemetryBuilder` (reads `OTEL_CONFIG_FILE`
when called without a path):

```csharp
services.AddOpenTelemetry()
    .UseDeclarativeConfiguration()
    .WithTracing(b => b.AddSource("MyApp.*").AddConsoleExporter());
```

Or, to load from an explicit path (ignoring `OTEL_CONFIG_FILE`):

```csharp
services.AddOpenTelemetry()
    .UseDeclarativeConfiguration("otel-config.yaml")
    .WithTracing(...);
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> **Integration pitfalls**
>
> - **`UseDeclarativeConfiguration()` requires `IConfiguration` to exist** when
>   it runs. If host infrastructure registers `IConfiguration` *after* your OTel
>   setup, the YAML source will be unreachable. Prefer
>   `builder.Configuration.AddOpenTelemetryDeclarativeConfiguration()` on modern
>   hosts, or `ConfigureAppConfiguration` on classic `HostBuilder`.
> - **Calling `UseDeclarativeConfiguration()` twice** on the same
>   `IServiceCollection` is a no-op after the first call. Only the **first**
>   file path applies; a second call with a different path is ignored (an

> >   EventSource warning is emitted).

Reviewer: Would be good if we can guide users away from these mistakes so they don't need to be such prominently stated.

Author: I'll restructure the README to document both constraints inline under the `UseDeclarativeConfiguration()` examples as prose, removing the `[!IMPORTANT]` callout.

On whether to fail (as a means to guide from such mistakes): I held back for consistency with the SDK's established pattern - setup-time conflicts surface as `EventSource` warnings rather than exceptions, to avoid observability infrastructure being able to crash the app it's monitoring. There's also a subtlety: when no `IConfiguration` is registered at all, the code still produces a working YAML-backed `IConfiguration`, so it isn't always a misconfiguration - the problem only arises if the host then supersedes it with its own registration, which we can't detect at registration time. The duplicate-path case is cleaner (it's always wrong), but I kept that consistent too.

Happy to revisit if the view is that DI registration errors warrant different treatment.

### 3. Write a YAML config file

```yaml
file_format: "1.0"

resource:
  attributes:
    - name: service.name
      value: ${SERVICE_NAME:-my-service}
    - name: service.version
      value: "1.0.0"
```

> ## Supported settings (this release)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Supported settings
```

| YAML field | SDK effect |
| --- | --- |
| `disabled: true` | `OTEL_SDK_DISABLED` - builds a no-op provider |
| `resource.attributes` | `OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES` - resource attributes on all signals |
| `resource.attributes_list` | `OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES` - resource attributes in pre-formatted `key=value` list form |

All other top-level sections (e.g. `tracer_provider`, `propagator`) are logged
and ignored. Full component support will require the factory contract to be
implemented (see

> [#6380](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/issues/6380)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All other top-level sections (e.g. `tracer_provider`, `propagator`) are logged
and ignored. You can track this issue for missing features:
[#6380](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/issues/6380).
```

## Environment-variable substitution

Values in the YAML file may reference environment variables using the `${...}`
syntax, per the OTel spec:

| Syntax | Meaning |
| --- | --- |
| `${MY_VAR}` | Value of `MY_VAR` environment variable |
| `${env:MY_VAR}` | Same with explicit `env:` prefix |
| `${MY_VAR:-default}` | Value of `MY_VAR`, or `default` if undefined/empty |
| `$$` | Literal `$` (escape) - so `$${MY_VAR}` yields literal `${MY_VAR}` |

> Undefined variables without a default resolve to empty string.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Undefined variables without a default resolve to an empty string.
```

## Precedence

When you call `UseDeclarativeConfiguration()` or
`AddOpenTelemetryDeclarativeConfiguration()`, the YAML source is **appended
after** all sources already registered on the builder at that point. That means
declarative configuration **takes precedence over** environment variables,
`appsettings.json`, and other sources that were registered earlier.

Sources you add **after** that call take precedence over YAML values (same as
standard `IConfiguration` ordering).

> [!NOTE]
> `services.Configure<T>()` / `PostConfigure<T>()` delegates run through
> the .NET Options pipeline and can override values from `IConfiguration`
> sources, but only when the SDK reads the relevant setting via `IOptions<T>`.
> The two settings supported in this release (`OTEL_SDK_DISABLED`,
> `OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES`) are read by the SDK directly from
> `IConfiguration`, so they are not affected by the Options pipeline. To
> override them in code, add a higher-priority `IConfiguration` source after the

> > YAML source (e.g. `AddInMemoryCollection`) rather than using `Configure<T>`.

Reviewer: I'd avoid saying things like "this release".

Author: Fixed in 894aa7ce38ad8ede1fc558e336daad1227926e61

A future **strict mode** will restrict the SDK to YAML-only OTel configuration,
ignoring host environment variables and `appsettings.json` for OTel keys (see

> [#6380](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/issues/6380)).

Reviewer: I'd also avoid calling out things not yet implemented as I think that's already covered above by the "this is what's implemented, everything else is ignored". Users who are interested can follow the issue.

Author: Fixed in 894aa7ce38ad8ede1fc558e336daad1227926e61

## Known limitations

- No file watching: the YAML file is read once at startup. Runtime reload is a

>   planned future workstream.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- No file watching: the YAML file is read once at start-up. Runtime reload is
  planned to be added in a future release.
```

> - `resource.attributes` values are percent-encoded per the OTel spec (`,`, `=`,

Reviewer: This point maybe a little over-verbose.

Author: Fixed in 894aa7ce38ad8ede1fc558e336daad1227926e61

  `%`, and `+` are encoded; other characters pass through). Attribute **keys**
  are not encoded; keep them to `[a-z0-9._-]` per OTel semantic conventions.
  Duplicate attribute names: first occurrence wins; subsequent duplicates are
  logged and skipped. `resource.attributes_list` values are passed through as-is
  (they are already in `OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES` format). When both fields are
  present, `attributes` entries take higher priority. `attributes_list` is
  comma-split using the same naive delimiter rules as `OtelEnvResourceDetector`:
  commas inside values must be percent-encoded as `%2C`; unencoded commas are
  treated as entry separators and will corrupt parsing.
- Schema validation is lenient: only sections this package handles are
  validated; unknown sections are logged and ignored rather than causing an

>   error. Full JSON schema validation is planned for complete Parse compliance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  error. Full JSON schema validation is planned in a future release.
```

## Further reading

> Design and implementation details (IOptions vs `IConfiguration`, substitution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Design and implementation details (`IOptions` vs `IConfiguration`, substitution
```

you need the literal string `"null"`, use a quoted scalar: `value: "${MY_VAR}"`.
The `InvalidResourceAttribute` EventSource event (Event ID 3) is emitted when an
attribute is skipped for this reason.

### Resource attribute name validation

Names containing `,` or `=` are skipped and Event 3 is emitted; these characters
would corrupt the `key=value,key=value` flat format consumed by
`OtelEnvResourceDetector`. All other names that do not follow the OTel attribute
naming convention (`[a-zA-Z_][-a-zA-Z0-9_.]*`) are emitted verbatim and Event 22
(`ResourceAttributeNameNotCompliant`) is emitted as a warning. This is a
.NET-projection constraint: the specification accepts attribute names verbatim
because they build typed resource objects rather than serializing to the env-var
format.

### Empty configuration file

A file containing zero YAML documents is a no-op in overlay mode and does not
require a `file_format` field (unlike a non-empty document, which still
validates `file_format`). Event 23 (`EmptyConfigurationFile`) is emitted at
informational level so listeners can observe the intentional no-op.

## Provide feedback

> Please provide feedback on [issue #6380](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/issues/6380)

Reviewer 2: @stevejgordon, I am not sure if you have ever checked how this code could work with https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet-instrumentation/blob/main/docs/file-based-configuration.md 

I didn't have time yet to do, but it could help with further development.

What is more Splunk extends usage it the distribution https://github.com/signalfx/splunk-otel-dotnet/blob/main/docs/file-based-configuration.md

Just dropping the places where we have real use cases for this.

Author: Thanks, I've taken a very quick look and had AI summarise the status for me. I'll need to spend some more time next week going properly through what you have.

## AI summary:

The instrumentation implementation is considerably more complete than this PR: near-full schema coverage, deserialized into typed POCOs, with vendored `YamlDotNet`. The significant differences aren't in YAML handling, they're output shape and precedence:

- It parses into a typed configuration model and constructs SDK objects from it. This package currently (this is just phase 1) projects YAML into flat OTEL_* keys in `IConfiguration`, which cannot represent named or multi-instance components.
- `Settings.FromDefaultSources` treats file and env-var config as mutually exclusive, which is what the spec suggests,. This package overlays YAML on top of env vars and `IConfiguration`, using the "implementations MAY provide a mechanism to customize the configuration model" allowance in sdk-environment-variables.md. Strict exclusivity (opt-in) is documented as a follow-on.

## My notes:

Long term I'd like to bring the coverage you already have across into this package, and expose an API you could consume instead of maintaining your own code.

The flat-key projection in this first phase isn't the intended end state. The spec defines `Parse` (file to configuration model) and `Create` (model to SDK components) as user-facing operations SDKs must provide, and that's the API I'd expect instrumentation to eventually consume: `Parse` hands you the typed model and you keep control of how you build things, rather than going through flat `OTEL_*` keys. Separately there's the schemaless `ConfigProperties` contract, but that's for third-party plugin component nodes specifically, not for reading the document as a whole.

We'd need to design propoer extension points for third-party configuration, which your Splunk link makes concrete. Part of that case fits the spec's model already (per-instrumentation settings under instrumentation/development, readable via `ConfigProvider`), but a vendor-owned top-level section like distribution: sits outside the plugin component types, so that needs thought.

I'd suggest keeping this PR scoped as is. For future phases I'll factor in what's already in instrumentation rather than redesigning it, so thanks for the pointer.

Reviewer 3: Could we preserve and expose a source-agnostic representation of the complete root configuration before this lossy flat projection? Consumers such as distributions and auto-instrumentation need access not only to the sections currently understood by the SDK, but also to additional fields that may be present at the root. The configuration schema explicitly permits such fields via [additionalProperties: true](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-configuration/blob/main/schema/opentelemetry_configuration.yaml#L2).
At this point both `root` and `config` are local, and `Convert` discards everything that cannot be represented as an `OTEL_*` key. This leaves consumers with no supported way to inspect sections such as `instrumentation/development`, `distribution`, or other additional root fields without reparsing the file.
Could the public API expose the complete parsed root through an immutable, source-agnostic model such as `ConfigProperties`, without necessarily exposing the YamlDotNet AST? An overload accepting this already parsed model would then allow auto-instrumentation and distributions to inspect their configuration and pass the same document to the SDK.

Author: Yes, and good timing. Context: this PR is deliberately a first phase, scalar handling and the three-state model only. The package has never released (and is excluded from the release process for now) so there's no date for even an alpha - The public API is still free to change.

The wider design I have in mind already has this. A library-neutral parsed map (string -> scalar | properties | list) backs a `ConfigProperties` equivalent, independent of both `YamlDotNet` and the source kind, preserving present-null vs absent. It's the same object the spec needs for plugin component properties and for `ConfigProvider`.

You found two gaps, and I've added both to my notes:

1. Reach. I'd scoped the bag to extension-component nodes only. Rooting it at the document is hopefully a small change.
2. Retention. You're right that unknown root keys are discarded, I only log them. I checked whether a bag still survives full schema coverage and it does: root is additionalProperties: true, Distribution has no defined properties at all (additionalProperties: {type: object}, minProperties: 1), and the dotnet node under instrumentation/development is the same shape.

One caveat: I'm aiming at full coverage including the experimental sections, so longer term you'd read typed instrumentation/development and distribution nodes. The document-level bag is the escape hatch for forward compatibility, not the primary API.

Is that direction right for you?

  quoted scalar: `value: "null"`. This is consistent with YAML 1.2 Core Schema
  semantics applied post-substitution as required by the OTel specification.

### Pitfalls to avoid

- `UseDeclarativeConfiguration()` requires `IConfiguration` to already be
  registered** when it runs. If the host registers `IConfiguration` later, the
  YAML source will not be visible to the SDK.
- A second call to `UseDeclarativeConfiguration()` on the same

>   `IServiceCollection` is ignored.** Only the first file path applies; a later

Reviewer: Unbalanced `**`.

Author: Resolved in [e176a5f](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/pull/7413/commits/e176a5fd7ca10fbb46e9e15a81f30828360be0f4)

`Configure<T>` / `PostConfigure<T>` overrides work at the Options layer, but the
practical benefit is small for these settings: values are consumed once at
startup and cannot change an already-constructed provider. The code-override
story is already covered by `IConfiguration` source ordering (adding a
higher-priority source after the YAML source).

If future settings use `IOptions<T>` internally, `PostConfigure<T>` would then
take precedence over YAML-supplied values, which is the expected .NET idiom
(code beats configuration).

### Runtime (dynamic) disabling

The `disabled` flag is evaluated once, when the provider is constructed. There
is no mechanism to flip a live provider from a real implementation to a no-op at
runtime. This matches the OTel specification (`OTEL_SDK_DISABLED` is read at
initialization only).

Once a real provider is built, its listener wiring is fixed. The closest
approximation is replacing the sampler with `AlwaysOff` at runtime, which still
leaves processors and exporters running. For runaway instrumentation, prefer
exporter timeouts, bounded batch queues, and process restart.

### Environment-variable substitution ordering

> The OTel spec states that node types must be interpreted *after* environment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OTel specification states that node types must be interpreted *after* environment
```

Author: Resolved in [e176a5f](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/pull/7413/commits/e176a5fd7ca10fbb46e9e15a81f30828360be0f4)

variable substitution.

This implementation parses YAML first (YamlDotNet RepresentationModel preserves
scalar literals without type conversion), applies substitution to those strings,
then interprets types explicitly (for example `bool.TryParse` for `disabled`).
Outcomes are semantically equivalent for supported scalar fields today, with a

> stronger guarantee that env vars cannot inject YAML structure because

Reviewer: ```suggestion
stronger guarantee that environment variables cannot inject YAML structure because
```

Author: Resolved in [e176a5f](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/pull/7413/commits/e176a5fd7ca10fbb46e9e15a81f30828360be0f4)

> substitution runs on already-tokenised scalar nodes.

Reviewer: en-US is the default docs target I believe.

```suggestion
substitution runs on already-tokenized scalar nodes.
```

Author: Resolved in [e176a5f](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/pull/7413/commits/e176a5fd7ca10fbb46e9e15a81f30828360be0f4)

### Empty-string and null semantics

> When an environment variable is unset and has no default, the spec replaces the

Reviewer: I won't comment on any more, but we should use full words not abbreviations in the user-facing documentation, so they should all be updated where appropriate.

```suggestion
When an environment variable is unset and has no default, the specification replaces the
```

Author: Resolved in [e176a5f](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/pull/7413/commits/e176a5fd7ca10fbb46e9e15a81f30828360be0f4)

reference with an empty string, then applies YAML 1.2 Core Schema type
resolution - a plain empty scalar becomes `null`. Quoted empty strings remain
`""`.

All YAML 1.2 core schema null spellings - plain empty, `~`, `null`, `Null`, and
`NULL` - are treated as **present-null**. Quoted variants (e.g. `"null"`) remain
strings.

For scalar fields where the key is present but the value is unusable (malformed
node type, invalid parse), the parser selects **present-null** rather than
**absent**, because the key appeared in the document and `nullBehavior` applies
at Create time.

**Post-substitution null resolution:** because the spec requires that YAML type
resolution runs *after* substitution, a plain (unquoted) scalar whose
environment variable resolves to one of the null spellings (`null`, `Null`,

> `NULL`, `~`) is treated as YAML null. For example:

Reviewer: This might be getting a bit jargon-y for a user.

Author: For now, my intent was to document some of the implementation details as we iterate on the design, with a view to clearing them later once we have progressed closer to a release. I can remove and capture these locally, but I thought it might be useful for those reviewing and potentially contributing during the early phase. WDYT?

```yaml
resource:
  attributes:
    - name: my.attr
      value: ${MY_VAR}   # plain scalar
```

If `MY_VAR=null` the attribute is skipped (same as writing `value: null`).
If you need the literal string `"null"`, use a quoted scalar: `value: "${MY_VAR}"`.
The `InvalidResourceAttribute` EventSource event (Event ID 3) is emitted when an
attribute is skipped for this reason.

### Resource attribute name validation

Names containing `,` or `=` are skipped and Event 3 is emitted; these characters
would corrupt the `key=value,key=value` flat format consumed by
`OtelEnvResourceDetector`. All other names that do not follow the OTel attribute
naming convention (`[a-zA-Z_][-a-zA-Z0-9_.]*`) are emitted verbatim and Event 22
(`ResourceAttributeNameNotCompliant`) is emitted as a warning. This is a
.NET-projection constraint: the specification accepts attribute names verbatim
because they build typed resource objects rather than serializing to the env-var

> format.

Reviewer: Cross-referencing all the emitted event logs and IDs in these scenarios is probably a bit overly-detailed for users.

Author: Same intent as https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/pull/7413#discussion_r3577700300

### Empty configuration file

A file containing zero YAML documents is a no-op in overlay mode and does not
require a `file_format` field (unlike a non-empty document, which still

> validates `file_format`). Event 23 (`EmptyConfigurationFile`) is emitted at

Reviewer: +1
